# WSL2
WSL2 stands for Windows Subsystem for Linux verison 2. Essentially, Windows is
running a full Linux system in tandem with Windows. This has much better
performance than running a virtual machine (VM) or using the original WSL.

This document will guide you through setting up WSL 2 on Windows 10.

## Installing WSL 2
Microsoft has published an [online guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10),
for setting up WSL2, but a more detailed, step-by-step guide is included below.
Follow the steps below, but you may refer to the online guide if you get stuck.

Check and update your Windows version:
   1. WSL2 Requires you are running at least Windows 10, version 2004, Build 19041 or higher. 
   2. To check your Windows version: Type “About your PC” in Windows search and click it or press enter
   3. Scroll down to “Windows Specification” and check “Version”. If you are 2004 or above, move on to step 2
   4. If you are below Version 2004, you will have to update Windows. The easiest way is to search “Windows update settings” in window search. Click it or press enter
   5. If there is a prompt to update to 2004 or above, please follow the instruction and then proceed to step 2. If Windows says the update is “on it’s way” or similar, follow the remaining instructions
   6. Go to the following link https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/software-download/windows10 and select “update now” towards the top. This will download an update assistant tool which will allow you to update to version 2004 or above.
   7. Run the program and follow it’s instructions. After completing the update, verify you are on version 2004 or above by following previous steps.

Enable WSL:
   1. Search for and click “Turn Windows features on or off” in windows search.
   2. Check the “Windows Subsystem for Linux” option
   3. Click “OK”
   4. Restart Computer

Download Ubuntu:
   1. Go to the Microsoft Store by searching for “Microsoft Store” in windows search. Click it or hit enter.
   2. In the Microsoft Store, search for and install “Ubuntu 18.04 LTS”

Verify version:
   1. In a Windows Terminal, run “wsl -l -v”
   2. If this command failed, you likely have WSL installed instead of WSL2, or you may not have installed Ubuntu correctly. If it shows “Ubuntu” with Version “2” you are good to go.


## Setting up X forwarding
X forwarding is what will let you display GUIs (graphical user interfaces)
on your Windows machine that are being run from your WSL2 instance. You need
to install an X client, set up the appropriate firewall rules, then tell WSL2
to forward it's display to your client.

The following steps will show you how to set this up. For more information,
check out this [StackOverflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/61110603/how-to-set-up-working-x11-forwarding-on-wsl2).

### X Client Set Up
There are several options available here. VcXsrv has been tested to work with
the ARC development environment and is available on [SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/).
VcXsrv is the recommended client.

[Xming](http://www.straightrunning.com/XmingNotes/) is also popular, but more
recent versions of the software are blocked behind a paywall. You can download
the latest free versions on [SourceForge](http://www.straightrunning.com/XmingNotes/).

When you launch your X client for the first time, you will see several
configuration pages.
1. Leave the display settings at the default: multiple windows, -1
2. Leave the client settings at the default: start no clients
3. Modify the extra settings as follows:
   - Check "Disable access control". This is safe to do, since we will use
     Windows Firewall to block the client. This allows your WSL2 and Docker
     instances to access the client.

### Windows Firewall Setup
When you first launch your X client, you should see Windows Firwall pop up. Go
ahead and tell it to block the program on atleast public networks.

Now that everything is blocked, we need to put in an exception so that our WSL2
instance is able to access the X client.

1. Hit the Windows key and type "Firewall" then hit enter.
2. Navigate to "Inbound Rules"
3. Scroll until you find "VcXsrv windows xserver. There should be four enabled, blocking rules.
4. Select the only rule that is both "Profile: Public" and "Protocol: TCP"
5. Select "Copy" in the right hand window
6. Select "Paste in the right hand window
7. Select "Disable Rule" in the right hand window
   - This leaves the original rule as a back up if you ever need to revert your
     settings for any reason.
8. Select "Refresh" in the right hand window
9. Find the new rule. It will be the only rule that is "Enabled: Yes", "Profile: Public", and "Protocol: TCP"
10. Select "Properties" in the right hand window
11. Under "General", append " WSL" to the name
12. Under "General", toggle "Action" from "Block" to "Allow"
13. Under "Protocols and Ports", change "Local Port" from "All Ports" to "6000".
14. Under "Scope", change "Remote IP Address" from "Any IP Address" to "These IP addresses:"
15. Add the following IP address: `172.16.0.0/12`.

Go ahead and save and close everything. You may need to reboot your X client.

### WSL2 Setup
We will need to edit a file called the `bashrc`. This is a script that is run
every time you open a new terminal in order to set up your environment. Modify
it by copy and pasting the below command in _exactly_.
```bash
echo -e '\nexport DISPLAY=$(awk '\''/nameserver / {print $2; exit}'\'' /etc/resolv.conf 2>/dev/null):0\nexport LIBGL_ALWAYS_INDIRECT=1' >> ~/.bashrc
```
Since we just changed our `bashrc`, we need to run the below command for the
changes to take effect in our current terminal:
```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

### Testing
You will need to download a small program called `xeyes` in order to test the X
forwarding. It can be installed and run with the following commands:
```bash
sudo apt install -y x11-apps
xeyes
```
You'll see a little pair of eyes follow your cursor around. You can X out of it
or hit `CTRL+C` in order to kill the program.

## Installing Microsoft Terminal
For a much nicer terminal experience, you will want to install the [Windows
Terminal](https://aka.ms/terminal). Once it is installed, launch it, then click
the downwards arrow icon on the list of tabs. Select Ubuntu 18.04 from the
dropdown, and you will be greeted with a bash terminal for your WSL2 instance.

If you'd like to make the default behavior to open WSL2 tabs, you can hit the
dropdown and select settings. This will prompt you to open a json file. You can
edit this an any text editor. On line 8, you can paste in the GUID for your WSL2
instance. This hexadecimal string is found by searching the file for `Ubuntu-18.04`
then looking two lines up at the GUID entry.
