# WSL2
WSL2 stands for Windows Subsystem for Linux verison 2. Essentially, Windows is
running a full Linux system in tandem with Windows. This has much better
performance than running a virtual machine (VM) or using the original WSL.

This document will guide you through setting up WSL 2 on Windows 10.

## Installing WSL 2
You will want to follow [this guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10)
published by Microsoft in order for the most recent set up instructions.

Make sure you follow instructions for WSL2, don't stop reading after the first
step.

When it comes time to install a distribution, pick Ubuntu 18.04 LTS.

## Installing Microsoft Terminal
For a much nicer terminal experience, you will want to install the [Windows
Terminal](https://aka.ms/terminal). Once it is installed, launch it, then click
the downwards arrow icon on the list of tabs. Select Ubuntu 18.04 from the
dropdown, and you will be greeted with a bash terminal for your WSL2 instance.

If you'd like to make the default behavior to open WSL2 tabs, you can hit the
dropdown and select settings. This will prompt you to open a json file. You can
edit this an any text editor. On line 8, you can paste in the GUID for your WSL2
instance. This hexadecimal string is found by searching the file for `Ubuntu-18.04`
then looking two lines up at the GUID entry.

## Setting up X forwarding
X forwarding is what will let you display GUIS (graphical windows and displays)
on your Windows machine that are being run from your WSL2 instance. You need
to install an X client, set up the appropriate firewall rules, then tell WSL2
to forward it's display to your client.

### X Client Set Up

### Windows Firewall Setup

### WSL2 Setup

## VS Code Setup
